README.adoc, before:

= Clientele-as-Code
:toc: macro

Use Git and docs-as-code to track and manage freelance/consulting projects, clients, and associated payments and invoicing.

[WARNING]
This is a minimum-viable proof of concept (*MVP*).
It is mainly intended to be exemplary and to poll for interest in <<development,further development>>.

toc::[]


== Features and Purpose

Here is what the Clientele-as-Code project can already enable:

* Store client metadata and payment/invoice records in a *YAML* file.
* Generate invoices from the YAML sources:
** *HTML* and *PDF* output formats
** *AsciiDoc* source files written automatically
* Track payments and unpaid invoices.

See the demo PDF artifacts:

* link:https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code/blob/demo/clients/acme-corporation/invoices/hardsoft-invoice-acme-corporation-001-2024-09-01-PAID.pdf[Invoice 001 (paid)]
* link:https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code/blob/demo/clients/acme-corporation/invoices/hardsoft-invoice-acme-corporation-002-2024-10-01-OVERDUE.pdf[Invoice 002 (large, overdue)]
* link:https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code/blob/demo/clients/acme-corporation/invoices/hardsoft-invoice-acme-corporation-003-2024-11-01.pdf[Invoice 003 (new)]

=== Why Do Invoices This Way?

There are a few benefits of this approach that I have considered, though they are yet to be demonstrated in practice to be true advantages.

source control:: Track all of your payments in Git.
cost control:: It's free! Forever.
total control!:: You can customize and extend to your heart's content.
GAI/GPT assist:: Use AI to help you fill out your invoices.

Cloud and other premium software that helps you track work and perform invoicing can get very expensive.

Filling out forms is less fun than letting a tool like GitHub Co-pilot help you write your invoices.

*Free backup to GitHub*, GitLab, or your private Git repo host of choice -- or just backup to your backup.
This is *more confidence, privacy, and security* than most paid systems provide.

=== Who is This For?

While no real experience with the underlying technologies is required, this project will probably be most useful to people who already use Git and markup.

If you want to *heavily customize* the invoice template, you will need to use Liquid, which is designed for non-programmers.
This is also the only case in which you would need to know any AsciiDoc, and to be frank, AsciiDoc with Liquid markup mixed in is not the easiest way to learn either format if you are not already adept at using markup.

The YAML files as currently implemented should be fairly intuitive for "`less-technical`" users.
While they can be "`broken,`" so to speak, this whole system is safe for novice users -- it does not automatically send anything to clients.
If something is broken, you'll know it before your clients see anything.

It's not yet clear if Clientele-as-Code will make invoicing more *collaborative for large teams*, but my hope is that it will offer all the advantages that source-control systems have provided for collectively managing product codebases.
I can imagine a situation where multiple workers at a firm can track their time on a given project, and an additional worker can handle the actual generating and management of invoices, all from a central repository.


== Setup

This is a quickstart guide to getting up and running with Clientele-as-Code.
More thorough documentation will be a feature of <<development,further development>>, if this MVP is successful.

=== Prerequisites

* *Docker* _OR_ a proper *Ruby* environment (2.6+).

It is _strongly recommended_ to use the provided Dockerfile to generate a Docker image that will run the script in a temporary container.
This process is very fast.

Docker requires a proper Unix-like environment, so either MacOS or Windows with WSL2 will work, in addition to native Linux.

* link:https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/windows-install//[Docker for Windows]
* link:https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/mac-install/[Docker for Mac]

*If you are already a Ruby user*, try `bundle install` and `bundle exec ruby invoices.rb <client-name>` after cloning the repo.

=== Installation

. Navigate to your main (global) work projects directory.
+
.Example
 cd ~/Documents/work/projects

. Clone the repository.
+
 git clone https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code.git invoices

. Change to the project directory.
+
 cd invoices

. Build the Docker image.
+
 docker build -t clientele:latest .

. Make the `invoice.sh` script executable.
+
 chmod +x invoice.sh

=== Demo Procedure

Test the procedure using the sample data provided.

. Run the script to generate the latest invoice.
+
 ./invoice.sh acme-corporation
+
This generates the _latest_ invoice to the path `clients/acme-corporation/generated/` in AsciiDoc (`.adoc`), HTML5 (`.html`) and PDF (`.pdf`) formats.

. Try it with a specific (previous) invoice ID.
+
 ./invoice.sh acme-corporation 001
 ./invoice.sh acme-corporation 002

Note, there are three sample invoice periods, each showing off different aspects of the rendering system.
Invoice `001` received multiple payments but was paid off.

=== Customize Data Source Files

You'll need your own versions of the global `_config.yml` file, which reflects _your_ company details and configuration settings.

To establish this, *edit the `_config.yml` file* in the root directory.

[NOTE]
If you already have a `_config.yml` file in your root directory, you name the file `_invoices.yml`, or just add the `provider` and `settings` blocks from our `_config.yml` to your own, assuming they do not conflict.

Then make a copy of the `clients/acme-corporation/` directory and modify it to meet your first client's specifics.

. _If necessary_, make a client directory.
+
 mkdir clients/your-client-id

. Copy the data files from the example directory.
+
 cp -r clients/acme-corporation clients/your-client-id

Be sure to change the `_client.yml` and `_payments.yml` files.

=== Generate an Invoice

With your source files customized, you can run the script to build invoices for your client.

 ./invoice.sh your-client-id

If you are not happy with the invoice output, simply make changes to your data files and try this command again.

=== Customize Invoice Output

Some basic configuration of how the invoice will render can be established in the `settings` block inside the `_config.yml` file.
These are presented as commented-out lines that express the default value for each.
Uncomment and modify them as needed.

Further customization can be done in the `templates/invoice.asciidoc` file.

=== Usage Notes

Here are some tips for using this platform:

* Invoice records should be listed most recent to oldest -- or at least the current/latest should be the first in the sequence, so it can be generated without specifying an ID in the `./invoice.sh` command.

* Adding a `paid` property to an invoice's `dates` block will trigger the `-PAID` filename tag and the *PAID* stamp on the PDF version of the invoice.
Registering `payments` will _not_ mark an invoice paid, even if the total is met.
+
[source,yaml]
----
dates:
  sent: 2024-09-01
  due: 2024-09-30
  paid: 2024-09-15 # whenever this appears, the invoice is considered fully paid
----

=== Integrate into Existing Directory (Advanced)

If you already have a directory containing client directories, you can integrate this project into that structure.

Clone to local::
If your existing directory is _not_ already a Git repository, you can clone the repository directly into it.
+
 git clone https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code.git .

Download and extract to local::
If you just want to add these files to an existing repository, be sure changes are committed and/or the path is backed up:
+
 wget https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code/archive/refs/heads/main.zip && unzip main.zip && mv clientele-as-code-main/* . && rm -rf clientele-as-code-main main.zip README.adoc spec

Integration into an existing codebase/repo should be made far more elegant if this project is released as a proper Ruby gem (see <<development>>).

[NOTE]
Remember to use `chmod +x invoice.sh` to make the script executable.


== Development

As mentioned, this is simply a proof-of-concept, mainly:

. To demonstrate the various ways my preferred AYL DocStack (AsciiDoc, YAML, and Liquid) can be used to solve diverse documentation problems with a code-like, Git-friendly approach.

. To see if it makes sense even for me to use on a regular basis to track my own clients and their payments.

. Hopefully, to demonstrate how Docker can make docs-as-code projects more accessible.

_If you are interested in this project_, give it a star and maybe post an Issue requesting a feature or fix that you need.

Here are the big changes I expect to make to this project if others really want to take advantage of it:

more customizaton::
The output can be endlessly customized, especially for international users.
We should make this as convenient as possible by adding it to the `_config.yml` file.

more features::
* VAT handling for European users.
* Dynamically customize invoice filenames.

contracts-as-code::
Single-sourced, markup-formatted freelance/consulting/etc contracts that can be managed in Git and digitally signed with extraordinary ease.
See link:https://github.com/briandominick/contracts-prime/tree/master[Codewriting Contracts].

proper gem release::
Package and release the underlying code as a Ruby gem with a proper commandline interface (CLI).

modularize template::
The `invoice.asciidoc` template should be broken down into numerous "`partials`" that are _included_ into the main template, so users can customize any one part of it without having to maintain a fork of the entire file.

improve invoice theming::
Both the PDF and HTML output are basically Asciidoctor default, and could use some better styling.

real documentation::
There should be a proper reference for the configuration properties, for starters, and maybe a tutorial.

move heavier logic to Ruby::
Some of the parsing now performed in the Liquid template would be better handled in Ruby, meaning we would transform the `invoice` data object before handing it off to Liquid.

separate core source from demo content::
Right now if you clone or fork this repo, your code will diverge as soon as you customize the `_config.yml` file or remove the `acme-corporation` directory.
A proper release will separate those files while making quickstart demos still possible.

better practices::
* The `Gemfile.lock` file should be tracked rather than Git-ignored.
* Gems should persist in a Docker named volume
* Unit tests should be added to Ruby script.

Commit message:

Add zip download install & YAML intro links

README.adoc, after:

= Clientele-as-Code
:toc: macro

Use Git and docs-as-code to track and manage freelance/consulting projects, clients, and associated payments and invoicing.

[WARNING]
This is a minimum-viable proof of concept (*MVP*).
It is mainly intended to be exemplary and to poll for interest in <<development,further development>>.

toc::[]


== Features and Purpose

Here is what the Clientele-as-Code project can already enable:

* Store client metadata and payment/invoice records in a *YAML* file.
* Generate invoices from the YAML sources:
** *HTML* and *PDF* output formats
** *AsciiDoc* source files written automatically
* Track payments and unpaid invoices.

See the demo PDF artifacts:

* link:https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code/blob/demo/clients/acme-corporation/invoices/hardsoft-invoice-acme-corporation-001-2024-09-01-PAID.pdf[Invoice 001 (paid)]
* link:https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code/blob/demo/clients/acme-corporation/invoices/hardsoft-invoice-acme-corporation-002-2024-10-01-OVERDUE.pdf[Invoice 002 (large, overdue)]
* link:https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code/blob/demo/clients/acme-corporation/invoices/hardsoft-invoice-acme-corporation-003-2024-11-01.pdf[Invoice 003 (new)]

=== Why Do Invoices This Way?

There are a few benefits of this approach that I have considered, though they are yet to be demonstrated in practice to be true advantages.

source control:: Track all of your payments in Git.
cost control:: It's free! Forever.
total control!:: You can customize and extend to your heart's content.
GAI/GPT assist:: Use AI to help you fill out your invoices.

Cloud and other premium software that helps you track work and perform invoicing can get very expensive.

Filling out forms is less fun than letting a tool like GitHub Co-pilot help you write your invoices.

*Free backup to GitHub*, GitLab, or your private Git repo host of choice -- or just backup to your backup.
This is *more confidence, privacy, and security* than most paid systems provide.

=== Who is This For?

While no real experience with the underlying technologies is required, this project will probably be most useful to people who already use Git and markup.

If you want to *heavily customize* the invoice template, you will need to use Liquid, which is designed for non-programmers.
This is also the only case in which you would need to know any AsciiDoc, and to be frank, AsciiDoc with Liquid markup mixed in is not the easiest way to learn either format if you are not already adept at using markup.

The YAML files as currently implemented should be fairly intuitive for "`less-technical`" users.
While they can be "`broken,`" so to speak, this whole system is safe for novice users -- it does not automatically send anything to clients.
If something is broken, you'll know it before your clients see anything.

It's not yet clear if Clientele-as-Code will make invoicing more *collaborative for large teams*, but my hope is that it will offer all the advantages that source-control systems have provided for collectively managing product codebases.
I can imagine a situation where multiple workers at a firm can track their time on a given project, and an additional worker can handle the actual generating and management of invoices, all from a central repository.


== Setup

This is a quickstart guide to getting up and running with Clientele-as-Code.
More thorough documentation will be a feature of <<development,further development>>, if this MVP is successful.

=== Prerequisites

* *Docker* _OR_ a proper *Ruby* environment (2.6+).

It is _strongly recommended_ to use the provided Dockerfile to generate a Docker image that will run the script in a temporary container.
This process is very fast.

Docker requires a proper Unix-like environment, so either MacOS or Windows with WSL2 will work, in addition to native Linux.

* link:https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/windows-install//[Docker for Windows]
* link:https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/mac-install/[Docker for Mac]

*If you are already a Ruby user*, try `bundle install` and `bundle exec ruby invoices.rb <client-name>` after cloning the repo.

=== Installation

. Navigate to your main (global) work projects directory in your terminal application.
+
.Example
 cd ~/Documents/work/projects

. Get this repository

.. Clone the repo with Git.
+
 git clone https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code.git invoices

.. Download the ZIP file and extract it.
+
 curl -L https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code/archive/refs/heads/main.zip -o clientele-as-code.zip && unzip clientele-as-code.zip && mv clientele-as-code-main invoices && rm clientele-as-code.zip

. Change to the project directory.
+
 cd invoices

. Build the Docker image.
+
 docker build -t clientele:latest .

=== Demo Procedure

Test the procedure using the sample data provided.

. Run the script to generate the latest invoice.
+
 ./invoice.sh acme-corporation
+
This generates the _latest_ invoice to the path `clients/acme-corporation/generated/` in AsciiDoc (`.adoc`), HTML5 (`.html`) and PDF (`.pdf`) formats.
+
[NOTE]
If this step does not work, you may need to run `chmod +x invoice.sh` to make the script executable.

. Try it with a specific (previous) invoice ID.
+
 ./invoice.sh acme-corporation 001
 ./invoice.sh acme-corporation 002

Note, there are three sample invoice periods, each showing off different aspects of the rendering system.
Invoice `001` received multiple payments but was paid off.

=== Customize Data Source Files

You'll need your own versions of the global `_config.yml` file, which reflects _your_ company details and configuration settings.

To establish this, *edit the `_config.yml` file* in the root directory.

[NOTE]
If you already have a `_config.yml` file in your root directory, you name the file `_invoices.yml`, or just add the `provider` and `settings` blocks from our `_config.yml` to your own, assuming they do not conflict.

Then make a copy of the `clients/acme-corporation/` directory and modify it to meet your first client's specifics.

. _If necessary_, make a client directory.
+
 mkdir clients/your-client-id

. Copy the data files from the example directory.
+
 cp -r clients/acme-corporation clients/your-client-id

=== Generate an Invoice

With your source files customized, you can run the script to build invoices for your client.

 ./invoice.sh your-client-id

If you are not happy with the invoice output, simply make changes to your data files and try this command again.

=== Customize Invoice Output

Some basic configuration of how the invoice will render can be established in the `settings` block inside the `_config.yml` file.
These are presented as commented-out lines that express the default value for each.
Uncomment and modify them as needed.

Further customization can be done in the `templates/invoice.asciidoc` file.

=== Usage Notes

Here are some tips for using this platform:

* If you are brand new to YAML, check out this link:https://www.educative.io/blog/yaml-tutorial[introductory article] or this link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BEki_rsWu4E&t=73s[intro video].

* Invoice records should be listed most recent to oldest -- or at least the current/latest should be the first in the sequence, so it can be generated without specifying an ID in the `./invoice.sh` command.

* Adding a `paid` property to an invoice's `dates` block will trigger the `-PAID` filename tag and the *PAID* stamp on the PDF version of the invoice.
Registering `payments` will _not_ mark an invoice paid, even if the total is met.
+
[source,yaml]
----
dates:
  sent: 2024-09-01
  due: 2024-09-30
  paid: 2024-09-15 # whenever this appears, the invoice is considered fully paid
----

=== Integrate into Existing Directory (Advanced)

If you already have a directory containing client directories, you can integrate this project into that structure.

Clone to local::
If your existing directory is _not_ already a Git repository, you can clone the repository directly into it.
+
 git clone https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code.git .

Download and extract to local::
If you just want to add these files to an existing repository, be sure changes are committed and/or the path is backed up:
+
 wget https://github.com/DocOps/clientele-as-code/archive/refs/heads/main.zip && unzip main.zip && mv clientele-as-code-main/* . && rm -rf clientele-as-code-main main.zip README.adoc spec

Integration into an existing codebase/repo should be made far more elegant if this project is released as a proper Ruby gem (see <<development>>).

[NOTE]
Remember to use `chmod +x invoice.sh` to make the script executable.


== Development

As mentioned, this is simply a proof-of-concept, mainly:

. To demonstrate the various ways my preferred AYL DocStack (AsciiDoc, YAML, and Liquid) can be used to solve diverse documentation problems with a code-like, Git-friendly approach.

. To see if it makes sense even for me to use on a regular basis to track my own clients and their payments.

. Hopefully, to demonstrate how Docker can make docs-as-code projects more accessible.

_If you are interested in this project_, give it a star and maybe post an Issue requesting a feature or fix that you need.

Here are the big changes I expect to make to this project if others really want to take advantage of it:

more customizaton::
The output can be endlessly customized, especially for international users.
We should make this as convenient as possible by adding it to the `_config.yml` file.

more features::
* VAT handling for European users.
* Dynamically customize invoice filenames.

contracts-as-code::
Single-sourced, markup-formatted freelance/consulting/etc contracts that can be managed in Git and digitally signed with extraordinary ease.
See link:https://github.com/briandominick/contracts-prime/tree/master[Codewriting Contracts].

proper gem release::
Package and release the underlying code as a Ruby gem with a proper commandline interface (CLI).

modularize template::
The `invoice.asciidoc` template should be broken down into numerous "`partials`" that are _included_ into the main template, so users can customize any one part of it without having to maintain a fork of the entire file.

improve invoice theming::
Both the PDF and HTML output are basically Asciidoctor default, and could use some better styling.

real documentation::
There should be a proper reference for the configuration properties, for starters, and maybe a tutorial.

move heavier logic to Ruby::
Some of the parsing now performed in the Liquid template would be better handled in Ruby, meaning we would transform the `invoice` data object before handing it off to Liquid.

separate core source from demo content::
Right now if you clone or fork this repo, your code will diverge as soon as you customize the `_config.yml` file or remove the `acme-corporation` directory.
A proper release will separate those files while making quickstart demos still possible.

better practices::
* The `Gemfile.lock` file should be tracked rather than Git-ignored.
* Gems should persist in a Docker named volume
* Unit tests should be added to Ruby script.
